 
5  
  
UNIT 1   Computer System  
Structure  Page Nos. 
 
1.0 Introduction  
1.1 Objectives  
1.2    A Brief History 
1.3 Structure of a Computer 
 1.3.1 The CPU 
 1.3.2 Register Sets  
 1.3.3 Datapath   
 1.3.4 Control Unit  
 1.3.5 Memory Unit and I/O Devices 
 1.3.6 What is an Instruction? 
1.4 How are Instructions Executed?   
1.5  Instruction Cycle   
1.6 Various Computer Architectures  
 1.6.1 von Neumann Architecture 
 1.6.2 Harvard Architecture  
 1.6.3 Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) 
 1.6.4 RISC 
 1.6.5 Multiprocessor and multicore Architectures  
 1.6.6 Mobile Architecture   
1.7 Summary  
1.8 Solutions/Answers   
1.0   INTRODUCTION  
In the present competitive world, a business can survive if it uses most advanced  
Information technology to support various businesses processes. In this digital world, 
computers are an important part your daily life. You use computer to use health services, 
banking services, teaching and learning services, online services made available by the 
Government and many more such services. Computer technology can be used to make 
all these processes more efficient and user friendly. 
This Unit introduces you to some of the basic terminologies used to define computer 
system of today. In addition, the breakthrough in the history of  computer systems has 
also been included in this Unit . This Unit also introduces you to some of the  popular 
computer architectures, like v on Neumann Architecture , which was one of the first 
computer architecture,  and other contemporary architectures of Computer System . 
Also, a simple novel idea for execution of instructions has  also been introduced. This 
basic process of instruction execution will be explained in more details in the later Units 
of the course.  You can get m ore information on these principles from the further 
readings. 
 
1.1   OBJECTIVES 
After going through this unit, you will be able to: 
• explain the basic structure of computer system 
• list and explain the features of the von Neumann architecture of the computer; 
• identify some of the important breakthroughs in history of computers; 
• identify the process of instruction execution; 
• define some of the contemporary computer organization 
 
 
6 
 
Introduction to Digital  
Circuits  
1.2            A Brief History 
This section traces a brief historical background of computer. You should be aware of 
that the push to construct Computer has not come from one person or group or 
organisation. There were many attempts to develop an automatic and programmable 
computing device. In 1944, the University of Pennsylvania developed the first 
automatic computing device, which was called Electronic Numerical Integrator and 
Calculator (ENIAC). It was a general-purpose machine fabricated utilizing vacuum 
tubes. This machine was planned basically to compute the shooting scope of weapons 
during World War II. It was arranged by manual setting of exchanging and associating 
links. An improved ENIAC model was called Electronic Discrete Variable Automatic 
Computer (EDVAC), which was completed in 1952. Meanwhile, the specialists at the 
Institute for Advanced Study (IAS) in Princeton assembled (1946) an IAS machine, 
which was multiple times quicker than ENIAC. 
A similar project was started in 1946 at Cambridge University. The objective of 
this project was to design a computer that stores instruction and data in the 
computer memory. This proposed computer was known as the Electronic Delay 
Storage Automatic Calculator (EDSAC). In 1949, EDSAC was completed and 
became the first computer of the world that stored the program instructions and 
related data in the memory of the computer. The architecture of these machines 
is discussed in section 1.6.  Thereafter, Harvard launched a series of computes 
named Harvard Mark I, Mark II, Mark III, and Mark IV. The machines have 
different architecture than that of other contemporary machines. This 
architecture was called the  Harvard Architecture. The Harvard architecture is 
discussed in section 1.6. The term Harvard architecture, now, used for machines, 
which have separate instruction and data cache memory. The term cache 
memory is explained in Block 2.  
In 1951, UNIVersal Automatic Computer (UNIVAC I) was developed. This can 
be called the first commercial computer . In 1952, IBM announced its first 
computer, the IBM701. Later in 1964, IBM announced a family of computers, 
called IBM 360 series. The basic concept of family of computers  was to keep 
the similar instruction set . However, the performance and price of the family 
increased with higher models. This allowed businesses to migrate to higher 
performance computer while retaining their investments in software. Another 
important computer series of this time  was PDP -8 by Digital Equipment 
Corporation (DEC).  
Advancement of technology lead to development of microprocessor on a single 
silicon chip. In 1971, Intel produced its first microprocess, called Intel 4004. The 
first personal computer (PC) was introduced by the Apple com puter in 1977. 
Further, in this year itself world again saw the installation of a mainframe 
computer. A mainframe computer had many user terminal that used to solve the 
processing power of a single mainframe computer  VAX-11/780 by the DEC. The 
year 1977 may be considered as an important year for computer industry, as in 
this year in addition to the developments as given above, one of the important 
microprocessor 8086, which you will study in Block 4, was introduced. This led 
to development of micro -computers. Different organisations launched their 
micro-computers based on Intel 8088/8086 microprocessors  or many other 
microprocessors. In the subsequent years, the computers developed by Compaq, 
Apple, IBM, Dell, and many others became popular  in the academia and 
 
7  
  industry. A powerful computer that could perform millions of computation, called 
super computers were developed.  The first such computer, the CDC 6600, was 
introduced in 1961 by the Control Data Corporation. Cray Research Corporation 
introduced the most expensive but most efficient super computer Cray-1, in 
1976. During the decades of 1980s and 1990s, more powerful super computers 
were launched. These super computers had larger number of more powe rful 
processors. These super computers were categorised on the basis of the sharing 
of memory by various processors, viz. sh ared memory and distributed memory 
super computers.  A super computer differs from a simple multi -processor 
system, as it can have hu ndreds or even more processors. Examples of  
computers at this time included Intel iPSC, nCUBE, Imaging Equipment (CM-
2, CM-5), and many others. The perfect design of computer is to install central 
servers through computer networks. These networks connect cheap desktop 
machines that have the ability to compensate for unmatched computing power. 
However, in late 1990s, with the popularity of Local area networks (LANs), 
which allow ed sharing of resources, mainframes and minicomputers were 
replaced by network computers or personal computers, called desktop 
computers. These individual desktop computers were then connected to large 
computers over broadband (WAN) networks.  The inclusiveness of the Internet 
has developed keen attention in the areas like network and grid computing. 
“Grids are geographically distributed platforms of computation ”. Grid 
computing provides reliable, consistent, persistent, and low-cost access to high-
end computational facilities. 
 Table 1.1 highlights the development of Computers, in terms of type of circuitry 
used, the size of Random Access Memory (RAM), the speed in terms of 
Instruction execution per second and Programming languages of those era. The 
Table also lists some of important computers of those days. 
 
TABLE 1.1 Decades of Computing  
[“Ref: https://www.discovertips.in/2017/06/computer-study-notes-history-and.html”] 
Semi-Conductor Chips and Computer 
A computer  system consists of number of components, which are fabricated  
using semicoductor materials. The basic unit of these semi -conductor materials is an 
electronic transisters, which are used to integrate large computer circuitry on a single 
semi-conductor chip.  Over the last five decades  computer has shown an 
exponential rate of improvement  due to growth and advancement in  circuit  
integration technology on a semi-conductor chip; from a handful of transistors 
to millions of transistors on a single integrated chip. This resulted in multiple 
 
8 
 
Introduction to Digital  
Circuits fold increase in the size of  computer memory and very large increase in 
processing capacities of computer processor. The integration technology has 
shown a rapid growth . Initially, only a few transistors were fabricated on a 
computer chip. This was called small-scale integration (SSI). Subsequently, with 
the advancements of technology, computer chips were made using the medium-
scale integration (MSI), then using the large-scale integration (LSI), then using 
the very  large-scale integration (VLSI), and currently to ultra large-scale 
integration (ULSI). Figure 1.2  includes various technol ogies and number of 
transistors per chip, also called as chip complexity.  The integration growth can 
be more understandable in terms of “feature size”. Feature size is that dimension 
of transistor that is required to be minimized without changing the functionality 
of the device. So, a decrease in feature size will eventually increase the number 
of transistors per chip which in turn, will result in development of new advanced 
chip having advanced functionality . This has resulted in growth of 
semiconductor memories (RAM memories) so that now, designers can trade off 
speed with memory size. 
\   
Figure 1.2: Numbers of Transistors per Chip 
[“Ref: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK321721/figure/oin_tutorial.F3/ ”] 
 
As discussed in the previous section, computer is fabricated using semi -conductor 
chips. This technology primarily have two stable states of representation, such as 
presence or absence of output. These two states are used to denote bits 0 and bit 1 
respectively. Thus, the computer is a digital device, which performs all the operations 
using binary digits (bits). Therefore, computer instructions, character set , data in 
computation etc everything is to be represented and processed using binary codes or 
binary number system. The minimal processing requirements of a computers system 
are:  
• It should allow input of instructions or commands and data  on which these 
comamands are to perfomed. 
• There can be large number of instructions that may be required for data 
manipulation. Some of these instructions  may involve decision making and/or 
repetitions, therefore,  it may be a good idea to store instruction and data. Thus, 
a computer should have memory. 
1.3 STRUCTURE OF A COMPUTER  
 
9  
  • The computer should be able to process data as per the command/instruction. 
Thus, it will require components, which may process data, store temporary 
results and transfer data among different units. 
• It should be able to store the results of the processed data using  some output 
unit. 
Therefore, a computer system should have a processor to perform computations as per 
the instructions, a memory for data storage/instructions, Input/Output units to input the 
data and insturction and output the results and a data path to transfer data . In order to 
define a simple structure of a computer system, the role and functions of its basic 
components should be studied. This section defines the basic components of the 
computer, like CPU, the Memory, the Input/output devices, data paths etc. 
1.3.1 The CPU 
The CPU is responsible for executing a sequence of instructions, which are part of a 
computer program. A computer program along with the data is stored in the main 
memory of a computer system.  The CPU consists of following components: (1) 
registers, (2) an arithmetic logic unit (ALU), and (3) a control unit (CU).  The role of 
each component of CPU is well defined. The registers are used to store - (1) commands 
or instruction which is presently being executed by the Arithmet ic logic unit, (2) they 
can also store addresses  such as address of operands /data, “address of the next 
instruction to executed ”,  (3) the data or operands itself. Arithmetic logic unit is 
designed to perform binary computations.  
The control unit  (CU) controls the execution of instructions by the computer. CU 
controls the fetching, interpreting and execution of the commands or instructions on a 
computer, which primarily results in processing of the data stored in registers or the 
main memory.  Figure 1.3 shows the structure of the CPU and its interaction with the 
memory system and input / output devices. The CPU “reads commands form the 
memory, reads and writes data from and to the memory, and transfers the data to the 
input / output devices ”. The most c ommon and  simple commands/instruction 
processing can be summarized as follows: 
1. Get the next instruction or command to be executed  from the main 
memory to the CPU registers 
a. In general, the address of the next instruction is stored in the 
program counter register (PC). 
b. The CU causes the instruction fetch operation using the PC. 
c. The fetched instruction is stored in the CPU, in general , in an 
instruction Register (IR) 
2. The instruction in the IR is interpreted by the control unit. 
3. In addition to step 2, the operands are brought from the main memory to 
CPU registers. 
4. The operation as interpreted at point 2, is performed on the data obtained 
in step 3. 
5. Results of the operation in step 4 are stored in the CPU registers. In case 
the instruction specifies that the result of the operation is to be stored in 
the memory, then the result data in CPU registers are transferred to the 
specified memory locations. 
The exec ution cycle is rep eated as long as there are more commands  to be 
executed. Sometimes the execution of a program is required to be terminated 
abnormally due to occurrence of certain error or other conditions, like division 
by zero. Thus, there may be need of a mechanism that can interrupt the execution 
 
10 
 
Introduction to Digital  
Circuits of a sequence of instruction. This mechanism is known as an interrupt 
mechanism, which uses an interrupt signal. On occurrence of an interrupt signal, 
CPU suspends the execution of next instruction to be execu ted, though it 
completes the execution of the current instruction. More specifically, w hen a 
request for interruption occurs, a move to an interrupt management process 
occurs. Interrupt management systems are the set of programs that are used to 
address the cause of the interruption and restores the system to the last instruction, 
where interruption was acknowledged. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.3: Central processing Unit and its components 
1.3.2. Register Set 
Registers are extremely fast , but temporary storage locations, within the CPU. 
Registers store the intermediate results, therefore, are used to enhance the CPU 
performance for performing arithmetic; logical or other operations. The names, 
number, type, and length of r egisters are different for different computers. In 
general, general  purpose registers can be used for storing the data for an 
operation or address of an operand or any other purpose of  various tasks in a 
program. Special purpose registers are limited to designated functionalities only. 
There are cases when some registers are used only for performing operations on 
data and cannot be used for operand address c omputations. These data registers 
length should be long enough to hold values for most types of data. Some 
machines allow two inte grated registers to hold longer length  data. Address 
registers are used for computing the address of an operand in the memory. This 
task may be assigned to specific types of register or the general address purpose 
register may be used for this purpose too . Address registers should be long 
enough to handle a very large address , which in general depends on the size of 
the memory. The number of registers in a computer affects the size of the instructions. 
Why? you wil l find answer to this question in Block 3. Some important registers are 
given below: 
 
 
 
Clock 
Signal 
Logic 
 control 
signal 
Internal 
Registers 
Cache 
Memory 
Control Unit 
Memory Unit 
Arithmeti
c Logic 
Unit 
 
Output Unit 
 
Input Unit 
 
Main Memory  
Central Processing Unit (CPU) 
 
11  
  Register for Fetching and storing Instructions 
In a computer system the instructions of a program are stored in the main 
memory. Two main registers , which are involved for transferring instructions 
from main memory to CPU are: Program counter (PC) and instruction/command 
or instruction register (IR). PC contains the address of the memory location from 
which the next command may be executed. Instructions are fetched to IR, so that 
it can be interpreted and executed.   
Condition Registers and Status registers 
In s ome computer s, status registers or flag  registers are used to store status 
information of various operations . Some computers have a special program 
status register (PSW). PSW contains the present status of the processor flags. A 
detailed discussion on flags is given in Block 3 and Block 4.  
1.3.3. Datapath 
As discussed earlier, a computer performs instruction execution using di ffernet 
components. Bu t, how does the data and instructions get communicated from one 
component to other. This is achieved by datapaths. There can be two diferent types of 
datapaths:  
(i) The datapaths which are internal to CPU: Such datapaths transfer two different 
categories of data. Data category, which includes data contained in different registers 
of ALU. The control data, which essentially pulls control signals from the datapaths for 
the use of control unit. In addition, the data is moved between two registers or between 
ALU and a register. This i nternal data migration is done by local buses, which may 
carry control information, instructions and addresses.  
(ii) Externally, data may be  transferred to and  from registers to memory and I / O 
devices, usually using a special set of circuit called the system bus.  
Internal data transfer between registers and between ALUs and registers can be done 
through various organizations including one, or more buses . Dedicated datapaths can 
also be used for data transfer devices between the CPU components on a regular basis. 
For example, Program counter register (PC) content is transferred to Memory Address 
Register (MAR) to fetch new commands at the commencement of each command cycle. 
Therefore, dedicated datapaths from PC to MAR can help speed up this part of 
command execution. 
1.3.4. Control Unit  
The control unit is primary unit which commands operations of the system by 
giving control signals to various units of computer. The control unit is also 
responsible to regulate internal and external flow of data from CPU. The data 
transfer from CPU to/from memory and CPU to/from I/O is also controlled by 
these signals. A continuous pulse sequence is generated by a system clock over 
a set period of time. This sequence of steps, identified as t0, t1, t2, ..., (t0 ≤ t1 ≤ 
t2, ...), is used to perform a specific command by enabling control signals in a 
specific order. The details on various types of control units and their operation 
are discussed in Block 3 of this course.  
1.3.5 Memory Unit and I/O Devices  
An interesting part of computer is the memory of a computer, which stores the data as 
well as instructions. Computer stores binary digits 0 and 1 called bits. However , bit is 
a very elementary, therefore, a meaningful combination of bits is generally, required to 
be stored in memory. A group of 8 bits is traditionally called a “Byte”. However present 
day data may include 16 bits (2 bytes), 32 bits (4 bytes), 64 bits (8 bytes) and so on. 
 
12 
 
Introduction to Digital  
Circuits Interestingly the size of the memory is represented as a byte in many situations, which 
was equal to one character in earlier data representation (Please refer to Unit 2 for data 
representation). Therefore, higher units are needs to measure the size of the memory. 
As computer is a binary device , an interesting combination as given in the follow ing 
table is used to measure the memory capacity.  
 
 
Unit Equivalent to 
1 Kilobyte (KB) 210 Byte = 1024 bytes ≈ 1000 bytes 
1 Megabyte (MB) 210 KB = 2020 byte 
1 Gigabyte (GB) 210 MB = 2030 byte 
1 Terabyte (TB) 210 GB = 2040 byte 
1 Petabyte (PB) 210 TB = 2050 byte 
1 Exabyte (EB) 210 PB = 2060 byte 
1 Zettabyte (ZB) 210 EB = 2070 byte 
1 Yottabyte (YB) 210 ZB = 2070 byte 
and beyond  
 
As stated earlier, the purpose of memory in computer is to store the instructions 
of a program and the related data. These instructions and related data to these 
instructions are fetched by the CPU , which then executes theses instructions . 
This memory is also called the Random Access Memory (RAM) as any location 
of the memory can be addressed randomly. Details on memory system are given 
in Block 2. 
I/O devices are used to input data and programs, e.g. a keyboard can be used to 
input a program. Present day computer use pointing devices and screens to select 
options from Graphical user Interfaces (GUI) like Microsoft Windows. The 
output devices like printer, monitor etc. display the output either in printed (also 
called hard copy) form or are displayed on the details on I/O dev ices are also 
given in Block 2. 
1.3.6 What is an Instruction? 
In the entire discussion on CPU, one term was used consistently - an instruction. What 
is an instruction in the context of a computer system? 
In general, you write programs in a high level computer language like C, Python, JAVA, 
C++ and so on. Most of these programming language requires you to compile the 
program into an object program, which is linked with library programs and loaded in 
the memory of the computer. A program also include some basic  data and I/O from 
keyboard or files. These loaded programs contains binary instructions, which operate 
on binary data. 
Some of the common high level statements include arithmetic instructions like addition, 
subtraction; decision like if -then-else; repetitive loops which also involves decisions 
like while, for etc.; and procedure/function calls. In all these statements few common 
characteristics stand out, which are made part of binary instructions as given below: 
(1) Each binary  instruction may define one operation using  a binary operation code 
also called opcode. 
 
13  
  (2) Each instruction may have one or more operands which may be data itself or can be 
used to compute the address of operand. A computer instructions, depending on 
machines, may consist of one to three operands. 
(3) The result of operation of machine instruction can be stored in some machine 
register. 
(4) Some instructions, like branch, function call etc., result in transfer of execution to a 
new instruction, which may be at a different address in the program . This, can be 
achieved by changing the value in program counter  register, which stores the next 
instruction to be executed. 
Binary instruction design of a computer system is a very comple x task. In fact the 
machine instructions of different computers are different, that is why you require a 
separate compiler for a separate type of computing machine. A detailed discussion on 
computer instructions is given in Block 3. 
 
 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) State True or False 
a) Byte consists of 8 bits, and it may represent a character.                
b) A character representation requires at least one byte.  
 
c) One bit is an independent unit and can be accessed independently.  
                                                                                             
d) A machine can have  two paths called internal and external.  
  
2) Explain the concept of an Instruction.  
 …………………………………………………………………………………………  
 …………………………………………………………………………………………  
 …………………………………………………………………………………………   
3) Why does a computer need CU, ALU, memory  and I/O devices?  
 ………………………………………………… ………………………………………  
 ………………………………………………………………………………………….  
 ………………………………………………………………………………………….  
1.4   HOW ARE INSTRUCTION EXECUTED? 
After getting a fair idea about basic structure of computer system, let us now 
understand about execution of a program. To learn about how a computer executes a 
program, let us take an example from high level language. 
Consider the following program segment of a high level programming language:  
 int x=10, y=5, z; 
 z=x+y; 
Please note that the instruction int x=10, y=5, z; will allocate three memory locations 
of type integer (how big will be one integer). The  x, y  and z,  in the context of 
programming languages, are called variables. This instruction will also assign integer 
value 10 in first location, identified by variable name x and integer value 5 in second 
location identified by variable name y.  
T/F 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
Introduction to Digital  
Circuits The instruction will also allocate a third memory location named z. Thus, first 
instruction, technically will be translated to create three integer location named x, y and 
z. Please note that these locations, when loaded in the memory will be identified as three 
separate addresses. The second instruction z=x+y; will be executed by the CPU to 
produce the desired results. But, h ow does these set of instructions be executed by 
computer? As a first step, a compiler program will be executed by computer and all the 
High level programming statements will be translated to a machine language program 
consisting of data in the form of variable locations and values, and instructions as binary 
operation codes and operand addresses.  
Please note in the C program segment, the declaration results in creation of variable 
locations, with data values.  
It is the instruction z=x+y;  which gets converted  to one or more machine 
instructions, which will have binary codes indicating  addition operation, opened 
address on which this addition is to be performed, and where the result will be stored. 
Assuming a typical machine is shown in Figure 1.4 
.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.4:  “Instruction and data format of an assumed 
machine[https://www.cise.ufl.edu/~mssz/CompOrg/CDA-lang.html”] 
 
Please notice the role of ALU registers. They get values of locations x and y first to be 
added by the ALU and the answer of this addition is stored in a register, which is sent 
back to the memory location z.  
 
In general, a machine consists of several registers as shown in figure 1.5. The details on 
these registers will be discussed in Block 3 of this course.  
 
Fetch – Decode – Execute Cycle  
    1011 1110 0110 1110 1101 0101  
 1100 0101 1000 0000 1001 1100  
 0110 1010 1111 0101 1000 0000  
 1000 0000 1001 1100 0110 1010  
.  .  . 
program and data  
A 
 B 
ALU 
A+B 
A 
B 
A+
B 
ALU input registers 
Register set  
ALU input data bus 
ALU output register 
Datapath 
  Memory 
Contro
l 
I/O 
 
15  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.5: “Central Processing Unit with registers 
[http://digitalthinkerhelp.com/what-is-cpu-processor-register-in-computer-its-
types-with-functions/]” 
 
1.5   INSTRUCTION CYCLE  
A program is having a set of instruction which are stored in computer’s 
memory. In general, the instructions of a program are executed sequentially by 
the processor. A computer system executes an instruction in the following four 
phases: 
1. Fetching. 
2. Decoding 
3. Read the operands from the memory. 
4. Execution. 
These steps are explained in details in Block 3. In this unit they are just being 
introduced.  
Fetching the instruction: An instruction is placed in the memory location or 
locations in RAM.  Instruction fetch will bring this instruction into the 
Instruction register. This step requires the information about where the 
instruction is in the memory. In general, PC register contains this information. 
 
Program Counter  
Instruction Register  
Program Status Word  
General 
Purpose 
Registers 
 
MAR 
 
MBR 
Memory 
Buffer Register 
Memory 
Address Register  
CPU Registers 
Central Processing Unit  
Data Bus 
Address Bus  
Main 
Memory 
 
16 
 
Introduction to Digital  
Circuits Decode the Instruction: Decoding the instruction requires to interpret the 
operation code of the instruction, this will be followed by finding locations of 
the operands in the memory.  
 
Read the operands from memory: Once the addresses of the operands are 
known, they are brought into the CPU registers, such that the required 
operation may be performed.  
 
Execute the Instruction: Finally the instructions are executed and results are 
stored in the local temporary locations.  
The process is shown in figure 1.6  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.6: Instruction Cycle [https://www.javatpoint.com/instruction-cycle]. 
Can a program be interrupted while it is getting executed? A program may be required 
to be stopped, during the execution due to occurrence of errors or occurrence of 
completion of certain other important – I/O events. This process has been explained in 
the next subsection:  
Interrupts 
The meaning of word interrupt is to stop the ongoing activity. In computer, an 
interrupt, stops execution of  next instruction in the instruction cycle, once the 
execution of ongoing instruction is completed. Why? Your will get an answer with 
this question in Block 3. 
Why does an interrupt occurs in a computer?  
Interrupt occurs due to:  Example 
Program instruction execution itself. 
Causes an interrupt.  
❑ Division by Zero occurs  
❑ The result exceeds the limit of the 
number allowed.  
❑ Security violations.  
Clock initiated. • Expiry of time limit of a program. 
I/O devices  ❑ Input/Output starting or 
completion 
❑ Error due to an I/O device 
Hardware generated. ❑ Memory errors 
 
Figure 1.7: Example of Interrupts in a Computer. 
Fetch Instruction 
Read address from 
memory  
Decode Instruction  
Excute the Instruction  
 Instruction 
Cycle 
 
17  
  Interrupt mechanism is a very useful mechanism for increasing the efficiency of 
program execution. The instruction cycle many continue, till the time an interrupt 
occurs. As a result of an interrupt, the  CPU knows that some event has occurred and 
then CPU stops the execution of the current program and goes on to process that event. 
CPU then uses the following steps to process the interrupt:  
• The CPU identifies the source of the interrupt. 
• CPU executes and Interrupt Servicing Routine ( ISR), which services the event 
that has occurred.  
• Meanwhile, the program which was being executed is moved to a hold state.  
• Once the CPU completes the ISR, i.e. executes it till its completion, it resumes 
the execution of program it has put on hold.  
Interrupts and Instruction Cycle 
The interrupt process is summarised below:  
• CPU is executing a program say “X”. and is in the decode stage of  ith instruction 
of the program X. 
• Assume an interrupt due to an event occurred at this time.  
• CPU waits till the ith instruction execution is complete, and then stores the register 
values & PC, which has address of (i+1)th instructions into memory or special 
storage area.  
• CPU indentifies the interrupt and executes the interrupt servicing program till it is 
complete. 
• CPU then return to execution of the (i+1)th instruction by restoring the register and 
PC.  
Thus, after interrupt processing, the execution of the interrupt program is resumed. 
Figure 1.8 shows Interrupt cycle.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.8: “Instruction Cycle with Interrupt Cycle 
[https://www.ece.ucdavis.edu/~vojin/CLASSES/EEC70/W2004/presentations/Ch_03.pdf”] 
Please note an important point in the figure 1.8, which is - interrupt enable and interrupt 
disable conditions. If CPU is executing very important instruction, the response to an 
interrupt can be disabled. In this situation interrupts will not be processed or 
acknowledged by the CPU till they are enabled again.  
Check Your Progress 2 
1) State True or False 
 i) Assume a computer has one-byte long instructions, its PC contains a         
decimal value 205 and only one byte is fetched from the memory at a    
time. For this machine, after fetching an instruction, the value of PC will 
become 206. 
 T/F
   
START 
HALT 
Fetch Cycle 
 Execute Cycle  
 Interrupt Cycle   
Interrupts 
Disabled 
Interrupts 
Enabled  
 
Fetch Next 
Instruction 
 
Execute 
Instruction 
 
Check for 
Interrupt:  
Process 
Interrupt  
 
18 
 
Introduction to Digital  
Circuits   
 ii) PC register is needed to fetch the data from memory. 
                    
 iii) A clock signal cannot cause as interrupt.                                                                  
 
iv) The interrupt are answered by the hardware.                
  
v) The processor processes one interrupt, even if, multiple interrupts 
        may occur at a time.  
2) Explain the term interrupt and its cause.  
  .....................................................................................................................................  
  .....................................................................................................................................  
  .....................................................................................................................................  
3) Explain the interrupt processing in a computer.  
  .....................................................................................................................................  
  .....................................................................................................................................  
  .....................................................................................................................................  
1.6   VARIOUS COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE  
Architecture of a computer contains procedures or processes to explain the user about 
the functionality of a computer system. This is analogous to design of a building, i.e. 
the construction of buildings is tailored to the needs of the user by taking into account 
the cost threshold. The original design is designed on paper. Likewise the computer, 
after it was constructed using the logic of transistors and integrated circuits, the 
construction was tested and built in a hardware way. Computers can be evaluated 
based on their performance, efficiency, reliability, and cost of computer software, 
which works with software and computer technology standards. In this section, you 
will learn about various computer architectures. 
1.6.1 von-Neumann Architecture 
John von – Neumann has invented this architecture. Several computers are based on 
the construction of this architecture and other improvements on this architecture. The 
basic building blocks of this architecture are-  
1. CPU  
2. Memory Unit 
3. I/O Devices 
4. Connection Structure  
Each memory unit  having multiple loc ations will have different addresses. Same 
memory is having instructions and data, which has multiple locations with each location 
having unique address. A computer program consists of instructions and data. CPU 
process the data stored in the memory or obt ained term input devices as per the 
instruction the program. The results are stored in the memory or output devices. The 
data processing operation in CPU use registers.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.9: Von Neumann Machine Ref: www.educba.com 
Buses (address bus / data bus / control bus) are used for communicating the address, 
data and control signals. The input device fetches data or commands and the Central 
processing unit (CPU) executes it. When the task is completed, the result is stored on 
output device.  
As discussed in the previous section, a computer system executes instruction/commands 
using processor and memory while the registers provide the processor's temporary 
storage requirements, whereas memory works with medium -term and long -term data 
storage requirements. Any data processing system consists of a sequence of instructions 
that enable the processor to perform the functionality you want. These instructions 
operate on data, which may be input from input devices. The processed data is the output 
of the data processing sy stems. We may store instruction and data together or 
separately. In the Princeton architecture, data and instruction share the same memory 
space. In Harvard architecture, system or instruction memory space differs from data 
memory space. Princeton configur ation can lead to easy hardware connection to 
memory, as only one connection is required. Harvard configuration requires, dual 
connections, can simultaneously read instruction and operand data, so it can lead to 
improved performance. Most machines have a P rinceton design. Intel 8051 is a well -
known Harvard architecture. Figure 1. 10 is a diagrammatic representation of Harvard 
architecture, whereas figure 1.11 represents the Princeton architecture of a computer.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.10: Harvard Architecture 
 
 
ALU 
 
Control 
Unit 
 
Instruction 
Memory 
 
Data 
Memory 
 
 I/O 
Control Unit 
Logic Unit 
Central Processing Unit 
Memory Unit 
Output 
Device 
Input Device 
 
20 
 
Introduction to Digital  
Circuits 
 
Figure 1.11: Princeton (von Neumann) Architecture 
Stored System Computers – 
Such computers can be programmed to do various tasks and also, applications are kept 
on them that is why they are named as Stored System Computers.  This concept of a 
stored system was presented by John von Neumann. In such computer systems, a single 
memory is used to store programs and data and is treated in the same way. A computer 
built in this way will be easy to imitate. 
The von Neumann architecture, also called as Princeton model, is a computer 
architecture designed by the 1945 definition of John von Neumann and others in the 
First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC. The draft defines the design of a digital 
computer. As per this document a general purpose computer should contain: 
❑ a Processing unit comprising of arithmetic unit, logic unit and processor 
registers  
❑ A control unit comprising of command register and a program counter register  
❑ Data storage in data memory 
❑ Limited external storage 
❑ Input and output methods 
The name "von Neumann architecture" has been attributed to any computer where the 
stored program and data are not transmitted simultaneously because they share the 
same medium of data transfer, called system bus. This is called a von Neumann 
bottleneck, as it restricts simultaneous access of data and instructions, thus, may result 
in reduction in the performance of the system. However, the single path simplifies the 
design of the von Neumann machine. In comparison, a Harvard architecture machine 
uses one dedicated bus each for address memory and data memory respectively, 
therefore, is more complex. 
The basic characteristics of Von Neumann architecture are summarized below. 
(1) A computer has the following operational units: 
• The control unit (CU), which interprets commands to be executed, and 
generates control signal which instructs other units about how to perform the 
operation.  
 
 
Memory 
 
Control 
 
ALU 
CLOCK 
STATUS 
Control 
Instruction 
DATA 
IN 
OUT 
Control and 
Address 
 
21  
  • Registers and other circuitry.  
• Input/output system, which are used for input of i nstructions and output of 
results. 
• A memory, which stores instructions as well as data (both).  
• The inter connection structures, which allow communication between various 
components.  
(2)  von Neumann machine works on a concept of stored program, which requires that 
data and commands both must be loaded into the memory of the main computer 
prior to execution &called as Random Access Memory (RAM).  
(3) The instruction/commands in a Von Neumann machine are executed in a sequence, 
therefore, to change this order of execution, a special instruction may be used.  
(4) A Von Neumann machine has a single path from control unit to main memory so 
only one of two-data or instruction can be transferred between the two at a time.  
 
1.6.2 Harvard Architecture 
When data and instructions are kept in separate memory then it is Harvard 
architecture. Data is fetched from one memory location and instruction is retrieved 
from a separate location. Pipelining can be done in this architecture. It is complicated 
to design this architecture. The CPU can fetch,  decode and execute instructions and 
data. The construction of this architecture has separate access for codes and data 
address.  
 
The modified Harvard architecture is similar to the Harvard architecture and has a 
standard address space for a separate data and instruction cache. It has digital signal 
processors that can handle audio and video data efficiently. It also has 
microcontrollers, the processing circuits that process small number of applications and 
has small data memory and speed up processing by performing the commands and 
data access simultaneously. 
Figure 1.12 shows different connection paths for modified Harvard architecture. All 
these four units are contained in CPU. It can perform simultaneous input / output 
operations and has a separate mathematical and logic component. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.12: The modified Harvard architecture. 
 
 
ALU 
 
Control 
Unit 
 
Instruction 
Memory 
 
Data 
Memory 
 
 I/O 
 
22 
 
Introduction to Digital  
Circuits 1.6.3 Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) 
Instruction set architecture (I SA) defines a set of instructions that are to be supported 
by a processor.  From system point of view, ISA does not care about certain computer 
implementation details. It is only about setting up or collecting the basic functions that 
a computer should support. Some of the common examples of ISA are Intel upgraded 
x86, ARM, MIPS, and AMD. 
An ISA includes differ ent kinds of instructions, sizes of differ instruction formats. 
These concepts will be explained in more details in the Block 3. The following 
example of MIPS ISA very briefly defines the description that should be supported 
by an ISA. You may refer to fur ther readings for more details in this ISA.  
1. ISA defines the types of commands that the processor will support. 
Depending on class of work they are doing MIPS Instructions are divided into three 
types: 
• Arithmetic / Logic Instructions 
• Data transfer instructions 
• Branch and Jump Instructions 
2. Maximum length of each type of instruction has been defined in ISA. 
3. Instruction format for each type of instruction has been defined in ISA. 
Various formats in MIPS ISA: 
• R-Instruction format 
• I-Instruction Format 
• J-Instruction Format 
 As every format is having separate command coding schemes in terms of operation 
code, number of operands etc., so they are required to be understood differently by 
the processor. 
The following diagram shows the hierarchy of abstraction of Architecture:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.13: The Abstraction Hierarchy  
 
Instruction Set 
Architecture 
 
Microarchitecture  
Registers and 
Counters   
Combinational and 
Sequential Circuits    
Increasing Level 
of Abstraction 
 
23  
  As Micro-architectural standard is placed just below the ISA standard and is therefore 
deals with the implementation of computer-based core functions as suggested by ISA.  
What is the  need to differentiate between Micro-architecture and ISA?  It is required  
to establish and maintain system compliance across all ISA -based hardware 
applications. Adapting different machines to the same set of basic commands (ISA) 
allows the same system to run smoothly on multiple different machines , thus, making 
it easier for e ditors to write and store code for many different machines 
simultaneously and efficiently.  
This abstraction hierarchy supports flexibility, which is why first the ISA is developed 
and then  various micro architectures  are created  that are compatible with th is 
machine-operated ISA. The micro -architecture is implemented using various logic 
circuits.  
 
1.6.4  RISC 
 
RISC formulation is being used by ARM core . RISC is a strong design and it 
delivers simple commands in a single cycle with high clock speeds. RISC targets 
to reduce the hardware complexity of instructions because hardware has less 
flexibility in comparison to software . As a result, the structure of the RISC 
places expectations on the compiler. Conversely, complex instructions (CISC) 
rely heavily on hardware for operational  performance, and as a result CISC 
commands are complex. Figure 1.14 shows this major difference. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.14: RISC vs. CISC 
 
CISC emphasizes the complexity of hardware. The RISC emphasizes the 
complexity of the compiler. 
The RISC philosophy is based on four main building codes: 
1. Instructions - Number of instructions  has been reduced in RISC . An 
instruction of RISC is executed in several segments. Instruction execution is 
overlapped in these segments (called pipeline segment). Each segment takes 
about one clock cycle time. For example , a processor performs complex 
tasks by combining several simple commands. Each command is of a limited 
length to allow the “pipeline to pick up future commands before deciding on 
current commands”. CISC instructions are usually of varied length. 
Compiler 
 Compiler 
Processor 
 Processor 
Code 
Generation 
Greater 
Complexity  
Greater 
Complexity  
Code 
Generation 
CISC 
 RISC 
 
24 
 
Introduction to Digital  
Circuits 2. Pipes - The processing of the instructions is divided into smaller units that 
can be made similar to pipes. Appropriately the pipe continues one step in 
each cycle of execution. 
3. Registers – Large registers for general purposes have been included in RISC 
which may contain data or address. CISC processors have  been provided 
with specific registers for specific tasks. 
4. Load-store creation - The processor operates on data managed in registers. 
Memory access is e xpensive, so separating memory access to data 
processing provides an opportunity . With CISC design the data processing 
functionality can work in direct memory. 
The RISC is explained in more details in Block 3. 
 
1.6.5  Multiprocessor and Multicore Architecture  
One of the ways to improve computer system efficiency is to have processors with faster 
clock speeds. But, owing to the thermal wall problem, when the clock speeds started 
hitting the thermal barrier, focus was on to extract maximum work out of the available 
system as an alternative of increasing processor speed.\ 
One of the ways to introduce parallelism in computers is to have more than one 
processor available in the single computer system referred to as multiprocessor system. 
It is very likely that at times the job (application) to be executed on a processor can be 
divided into various tasks with two or more tasks being capable of running independent 
of each other. Multiprocessor system corresponds to the architecture in which rather 
than having only one processor we have more than one processor available on the chip. 
Thus, if the job demanding execution comes with independent tasks, a processor can be 
dedicated to each task in order to exploit the parallelism in the job. In a way, 
multiprocessor system can be looked as a solution to offer hardware parallelism to 
match the available software parallelism in the job. This architecture corresponds to 
instruction level parallelism allowing independent instructions (or sub tasks) being 
assigned to different processors in the multiprocessor system allowing their parallel 
execution. If all the processors are same, the system is referred to as a Symmetric Multi-
Processor (SMP). The multiprocessor architecture shares the computing environment 
viz. memory, OS, system clock etc.  
In a conventional computer system, you had only one CPU available, which is 
responsible for the job execution focusing on only one task at a time. However, now a 
days, you hear about terms like a computer with quad core processor or an octa core 
processor. This architecture is referred to as the multicore architecture corresponding to 
both instruction level and thread level parallelism in a uniprocessor system. In this case, 
a single processor CPU is fabricated to have more than one CPU cores inside it. Each 
core acts an independent processing unit (CPU) and can execute independent threads, 
if permitted by the program. Thus, a quad core processor comprises for four cores 
whereas an octa core processor has eight cores capable of working independently on 
the same processor. 
The difference between multiprocessor architecture and multicore architecture lies in 
the fact that multiprocessor architecture has more than one processor available whereas 
multicore processors have a single processor with multiple cores used as independent 
CPUs. Thus, multicore architecture is multiprocessing in a single packaged unit. Both 
multiprocessor and multicore architectures correspond to the MIMD category of 
Flynn’s classification with multiprocessor architecture being more pure form of parallel 
processing. Practically, for improved performance, you can have multiprocessor 
machines with each processor having multiple cores.  
 
 
 
25  
  1.6.6  Mobile Architecture   
Nowadays, mobile handsets are no longer a means of enabling conversations but have 
turned into a small but powerful computer having many features like fast memory, 
support for software for numerous applications like chatting, document editing, 
entertainment, news etc. These phones have become really handy equipped with 
efficient performance and it has become really difficult to have a demarcation between 
a computer and a mobile phone. 
Just like any computer system, mobiles too have an input unit, a Central Processing 
Unit (CPU) and an output unit as shown in Figure 1.15.  The input unit could be a 
keyboard based or a touch screen based input mechanism and the output unit can be the 
screen or audio or video system. However, the CPU in the case of mobiles can be 
considered to be having two processing units viz. Communications Processing Unit and 
an Applications Processing Unit to cater to mobile calls and handling various 
applications available in the form of Apps. In addition, some other functional units like 
Display management, Memory management, Power management, Data management 
can be considered to be associated with the mobile system architecture but the 
discussion is beyond the scope of this course. All these units, under the mobile CPU 
can be understood to be working under the control of a mobile Control Unit for control 
and synchronization purposes. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.14: Block diagram of Mobile System 
Check your progress 3:  
Q1: Differentiate between the micro-architecture and ISA. 
          
          
          
           
Q2: Differentiate von Neumann architecture and Harvard architectures. 
          
          
          
           
Q3: Differentiate multiprocessor and mullticore processor  
          
          
 
 
Input Unit 
Communications Processing Unit 
Application Processing Unit 
Control Unit 
 
 
Output Unit  
Central Processing Unit 
 
26 
 
Introduction to Digital  
Circuits           
           
 
1.7 SUMMARY 
This unit introduces you to some of the basic architectural features of a computer 
system. A computing device consists of some basic units, like processing unit, which 
includes control unit and arithmetic logic unit, memory, input and output devices and 
data paths. This unit also explains the concepts of various computer architecture, 
which represents, how these various component of computer can be used to execute 
an instruction set. The unit also introduces to the concept of ISA, multiprocessor and 
multicore and mobile architecture.  A detailed discussion on the various aspects of 
Computer organization has not been included in this unit, they will be discussed in the 
subsequent blocks and units. This unit also introduces you to the concept of 
instruction and its execution by a computer. 
  
1.8 SOLUTIONS/ANSWERS 
Check Your Progress 1 
1) (a) True  (b) True (c) False (d) True 
2) An instruction in a computer system is a binary code, which is interpreted by the 
control unit of a computer and it communicates the following information to CPU: 
• the operation which is to performed 
• the operands and their location 
• the possible information of storage of results 
 etc. 
3) The CU controls - (1) the sequence of instruction execution, (2) the communication 
through the data paths, (3) the communication among different units (4) the operation 
to be performed by ALU (5) what to do in cas e of errors etc. Thus, in general, CU is 
responsible for complete control of a computer 
The ALU primarily performs the arithmetic and logical and shift operations on the 
specified data. Memory stores the data as well as instructions and I/O devices are used 
to input data or instructions as well as display of results. 
Check Your Progress 2 
1) (i) True  (ii) False (iii) False (iv) False (v) True 
2) An interrupt is the process of stopping the execution of currently executing program 
due to occurrence of some e vent, which requires attention of the CPU. The causes 
of the interrupt may be division by zero; arithmetic overflow, program address space 
violation, starting or completion of I/O, errors etc. 
3) Interrupt can be processed by suspending the execution of currently executing 
program and executing the ISR of the interrupting event.  It may be noted that 
interrupts can be acknowledged only if the interrupts are enabled. 
Check your progress 3:  
1) An ISA defines the set of instructions, but a micro -architecture provides 
details on how various functions will be performed by various units. An ISA 
is a top level design, whereas micro-architecture is a detailed design. A faster 
compatible computer can be designed with same ISA but more efficient 
 
27  
  micro-architecture. ISA simplifies the job of programmers, who may use 
same instruction set to write programs. 
2) The von Neumann architecture uses same memory for data and instruction, 
the Harvard architecture may have separate memories for instructions a nd 
data. In von Neumann architecture data and instructions cannot be accessed 
simultaneously but in Harvard architecture it is possible . The von Neumann 
architecture is simpler to implement in comparison to Harvard architecture. 
3) A multiprocessor system may have multiple processors, whereas multicore 
processor have multiple CPUs in a single processor. Today, a multiprocessor 
system can be constructed using multicore processor chips. Both these 
technology are of the type MIMD, which is multiple instruction and multiple 
data form of multiprocessing, thus, allow multiple sections of programs being 
executed at the same time operating on separate data. 
